---
layout: post
title: Elucidating k-mer Contamination with Kullback-Leibler Divergence
---

# Elucidating k-mer Contamination with Kullback-Leibler Divergence

## Severe Read Contamination

Recently a coworker showed me a FASTQ file from an Illumina HiSeq run
(which will be packaged in the new release of my Bioconductor package
[qrqc](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/qrqc.html))
that was severely contaminated. Below is the file in `less` with a
string highlighted:

![A severely contaminated file in less, with many contaminants highlighted](/images/less_contams.png)

Holy contamination, Batman! There are a few approaches to handling
this level of contamination. The program
[tagdust](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19737799) will match
contaminated reads and remove them. My program
[Scythe](github.com/vsbuffalo/scythe) is being changed so that it can
match adapter contaminants further in the read using its Bayesian
model. Both programs require *a priori* knowledge of possible
contamiant sequences - what if this is a novel sequence contaminant?
In this case, `AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT` appears to be a PCR primer
related to DSN normalization that may not have made it into our
adapter files.

## k-mer Entropy Approaches

k-mer approaches are a nice way of searching for such contaminants. I
am currently adding this feature to `qrqc`; you can follow development
on the `kmer` branch on [Github](http://github.com/vsbuffalo/qrqc) but
this branch may merge into master and disappear.

The C functions I've written use Heng Li's
[khash.h](http://attractivechaos.awardspace.com/khash.h.html) library
to quickly hash k-mer sequences with their positions in the read. The
end result is a data frame in R of k-mer sequence, position, and
counts in that position.

Looking at raw k-mer counts is somewhat useful, but I've been
exploring some information theoretical approaches to analyzing this
data. One useful graphic is entropy of k-mers by position:

![k-mer entropy increasing by position in read](/images/kmer_entropy.png)

These are 6-mers, so there are 4,096 possible k-mers (excluding N). If
the k-mer distribution were uniform, 12 bits would be needed to encode
each k-mer. This graph illustrates that even at the most random 3'-end
of the read, only about 6.5 bits are needed. In the first 20 bases,
the distribution of k-mers is so skewed that less the Shannon entropy
is less than four bits.

## Kullback-Leibler Divergence Approach

It makes sense biologically that the k-mers don't have uniform
frequency. In the case of read contaminants, the enrichment by
position against an empirical k-mer distribution may be as interesting
as total k-mer enrichment against a random distribution model.

To assess this, some beta `qrqc` code pools k-mer counts across
position to find an empirical k-mer distribution. Then, the k-mer
distribution per position is compared to the pooled distribution using
the
[Kullback-Leibler divergence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kullback%E2%80%93Leibler_divergence). K-L
divergence is only defined when both distributions sum to 1, the
sample spaces are the same, and if *q(i) > 0 for any i such that p(i)>
0*.

In essence, the K-L divergence is measuring the average number of bits
needed to encode data from *P* with a code based on the distribution
of *Q*. In the k-mer case, *Q* is the empirical distribution of k-mers
irrespective of k-mer position and *P* is the position-specific
distribution of k-mers. Thus, an enrichment of k-mers at a particular
position would lead to more divergence.

A nice feature of `ggplot2` is the stacking of the "bar" geom. Since
K-L divergences are sums, stacking and setting fill color by k-mer
(the terms of the sum) gives us a sense of the total divergence and
each k-mer's effect on the total. There are too many k-mers to plot,
so I have some procedures that find a nice subset. Because this is a
subset, the K-L total (indicated by bar height) **is wrong**, but the
graphical interpretation is easier. Now, the enrichment by position is
clear:

![Kullback-Leibler divergence of k-mers](/images/kl_kmer.png)

This messy dataset has repeat primer contamination. Note that because
we're plotting a *subset* of k-mers, there is negative total K-L (not
mathematically possible) because we're leaving out terms in the sum,
but the meaning still comes through. Also note that there is k-mer
nesting: The first wide peak begins with k-mer `TATCAA`, then
`ATCAAC`, then `TCAACG`, etc. This indicates that we could adjust k
and find the entire repeated k-mer.

## Update

I've added faceting of multiple `SequenceSummary` objects' KL/k-mer
diagnostics. Combined with a random data file, this really illustrated
contamination:

<a href="/images/large_facet_kl.png"><img src="/images/tiny_facet_kl.png"/></a>

This is still in development; follow the code on
[Github](http://github.com/vsbuffalo/qrqc) and feel free to contact me
and make suggestions.
